[Applause]
well thank you all it's a delight to be
here again let me see some familiar
faces and some new ones and our guest in
conversation this evening is Siddhartha
Mukherjee who is a cancer physician
still sees patients you know keeps his
bedside manner brushed up and also runs
a lab looking at stem cells both of
these at Columbia University in New York
and cities also a writer some of you
will know so is it his book the Emperor
of all maladies was on Tynes list of 100
most important books ever written so no
pressure there and won the Pulitzer
Prize and also as we were discussing
just earlier also on the Guardian first
book prize which i think is a good
accolade for a book prize that crosses
over between literature and scientific
and factual books so we're delighted to
have Sid along and you know we'll chat
between us we hope you'll pay attention
for a little while there'll be time for
questions in the second half and it's
not we're not going to give you a
tutorial there's no whiteboard we
haven't brought any PowerPoint but I did
think it was worth at least to begin
with if you don't mind said reviewing
some of the basic facts about this stuff
because you know just the sort of level
the playing field out and I'm gonna ask
what I mean begin by asking you yes Ian
Fleming in fact you're asking me in
Fleming on Johnny curry I'm gonna ask
each on the carry better on love in my
view and you so it begins
I'll show which way the house went on
that one right so you you in this lovely
book that you've written we'll be
signing afterwards the Jean and intimate
history you talked about the gene the
atom and the bite as being with away as
being the the fundamental units you know
of the contemporary world will leave
bytes and atoms aside for the moment so
I think we'll return to both of them a
little bit later but can I ask what I
think is probably a deceptively simple
question SID can you just explain to us
briefly what a gene is no we have an
hour and a half so you know a full
description really merits longer than we
have in brief the gene is a unit of
hereditary information that sounds that
rather abstract let me put it in a very
concrete in a very concrete way it is
the unit of information that you
transmit to your children I call it a
unit because it's indivisible you can't
break it up into smaller parts it is
transmitted whole generally speaking
although it can acquire it can be
swapped around with other with its
sister genes etc but really it's
transmitted all to your to your children
and it determines some aspect of your
children's physiology or appearance or
fate or future it there are many many
other things there are many other
properties of genes by which they're
defined but this for this audience for
this sort of discussion I think that's
where probably the the discussion should
begin and a couple of things about that
definition which I think already
interesting we've talked about the atom
and the bite which I said we wouldn't
decompose and come back to but we will
immediately they also have constituent
parts and we'll be talking about DNA and
stuff like that
but but I wonder if you could just
expand briefly on this notion of its
being indivisible I think that's the
word you used of its being unitary what
do you mean by a gene being entry given
it's made up of these letters in the
codes and things we'll talk about later
so a gene as many of us know is made up
it has a chemical form it's made up of a
string of nucleotides
a CTG you'll and if you were a gene if
you were to look at a gene or to read a
gene it would they would read like a CT
g c CT g GC c t-- t-- GGG etcetera if
you take the entire human genome a CT g
etc that would be about 3 billion odd a
CT G's okay
in the Wellcome collection there is the
printed out version of the human genome
is like little letters and it's exactly
it volumes if you look at that it would
be a estimate around sixty six full
volumes of the Encyclopedia Britannica
okay so one way you could imagine it is
that you're sitting in this room and
right up to the walls every wall
contains these sixty six full sets not
vol 66 full sets of the Encyclopedia
Britannica if you were to pick out one
of these encyclopedias you would read a
CT GC CT GGG etc etc now from that
information is obviously inscrutable to
you and me for the most part it's just
lettuce just lettuce four letters
repeated over and over again and yet if
you put those four letters into an
embryonic cell in the form of this
chemical divided into 23 chromosomes
that embryonic cell astonishingly can
build you and me with our commonalities
the fact that we have one nose and ten
fingers and our differences the fact
that you and I don't resemble each other
you like I mean fundamentally
but but fundamental differences between
you and me and the variation that we see
in ourselves if you change five letters
ten letters
twenty five letters some repeats
somewhere in that sixty-six volume set
of the in cyclic stick set of the
encyclopedia you could fall become a
victim to a deadly disease like
Huntington's disease if you had another
variation you could fall you know
you could fall prey to cystic fibrosis I
still want to press you though on this
what is a gene thing so and I'm asking
this as you know as a humble
neuroscientist therefore like most of
you not somebody who gets genetics who
understands this stuff so here's the
question I've got for you when you're
outside a domain it's impossible to know
which things inside the domain are
contested and which things everyone
agrees on yes so if I lined up three
geneticists would you all agree on the
definition of a gene and that would be a
dull question and you just want to move
on to the interesting stuff or is the
question of what a gene is the
definition of a gene is that still an
interesting question for you guys it's
something that's dynamic that's changing
over recent time is it contested and the
answer is that the answer is that they
would three geneticists in the room
would agree largely on what a gene is
okay okay they would have some
disagreement about how things are
evolving there new information coming
out of a gene that that is coming out
over time so they would agree that it's
a unit of heredity that it specifies
information especially in specifies
information about Physiology or Anatomy
or some important characteristic of of
information biological information a
gene need not be a continuous stretch of
DNA in you know 50 years ago if you
asked them well does it you need to be
one long stretch of DNA most people
would say yes we now know that's not
true for most genes in fact they've
broken up into into sort of little
entities and they get they get stitched
up together when they actually perform
their function does one gene have to
specify a single function no ifs can
specify multiple functions does one
function have to have one gene attached
to it no one function can be the product
of any genes so there will be
disagreements around these kinds of
questions but the idea that a gene is a
specifies a unit of information however
that information is used subsequently in
the physiology or the anatomy or the
body of the individual would be
generally agreed upon and then again I
mean you know the book is lovely I
enjoyed reading it enormously its
historical in part and we're not
to review and we've enough trouble right
getting the basic facts I'm not gonna do
the history of it but to give you an
analogy if we think about one electron
is right so many of us will remember the
Bohr atom from school which was like a
Sun and planets model yet the nucleus
the electrons whizzing around it and
nowadays we think in quantum mechanics
of fields of probability so in
contemporary physics there's no way of
describing an electron as a little ball
that Wizards round the bigger ball
there's no balls are knowing but the
electron is the same electron right you
know through the history of physics new
20th century there's still an electron
it's the same thing we just described it
in different terms has it been the same
thing this gene through the recent
history of genetics or has our
understanding of what this thing is
changed in the last 50 100 years so our
understanding of the word gene as a unit
of heredity has not changed good that's
important our understanding of what a
gene does how a gene acts how it becomes
functionally realized how it intersects
with other genes to produce the
complexities of human anatomy and
physiology that has changed and will
keep changing you know the analogy that
I gave to is to the word encyclopedia
right everyone here knows what an
encyclopedia is we know exactly what an
encyclopedia is we know the exact Vidya
does for the underlying issues like
Wikipedia but it's written down and yet
if I were to ask you how an encyclopedia
works how an encyclopedia has is updated
in time people would say well that's
been changing these days we updated
encyclopedias in a different way then we
updated encyclopedias 20 years ago in
fact if you look under the entry
encyclopedia in an encyclopedia that
keeps changing right that reason okay so
there's a there's an internal recursion
about it genes are a little bit like
that we know what genes are at a
fundamental level we know that they've
transmitted hereditary information from
from cell to cell and from parent to
offspring but the exact way that the
information is encoded what exactly it
does keeps changing how much it engages
what adding
keeps changing so a simple way to think
about it is you know a generally
speaking genes produce messages genes
can be often have been often likened to
a kind of hard copy they produce a soft
copy of message called RNA it's usually
the only way that the gene can exert its
activity the RNA itself has some
functions but it also produces as a
consequence of other biological parts
disease produces a thing called a
protein proteins are the basis of other
machines of life our hair is a
particular color because of a protein
our noses are built of proteins and
interacting with other molecules etc so
proteins are candle workhorses of
biological life genes essentially
produced the carry the code to produce
messages RNAs which ultimately produce
proteins and this sort of information
cycle allows the existence of the
creation of the maintenance of the
building of them the repair of human
bodies so essentially so I think we're
getting the sense that the gene is you
know it's not complete agreement between
three geneticists in row but you kind of
agree what it is what it is it's we've
kind of meant the same thing for quite a
while that's a hundred something years
and and in fact that hundred years of
course predates DNA yet we've all heard
of so weirdly the thing of which genes
are made yes was discovered after we
knew what they were right that makes
sense so tell us about how could that be
how could we have a thing which we
didn't know what it was made of and and
tell us about that relationship if you
like between the DNA important question
and the genes it's a very important
question I'm gonna talk about it
historical and give an analogy
historically speaking it's very very
important to understand this the gene
was visualized in an absent as an
abstraction before anyone knew its
chemical or physical form because of
course you can see that traits or
features or characteristics are moving
between generations as we share your
mom's knows all exactly even Aristotle
knew
that that in fact there was something
about information that was moving and he
really thought about it as information
he was one of the first people
it's an astonishing idea that I really
thought about you know there's a famous
quote I think Max Perutz said
Aristotle should have been given the
Nobel Prize for the discovery of genes
because because he really thought about
it in an informational way he thought
that there's got to be information
that's moving and he recognized that
occasionally that information can go
away and come back so a grandparent
could could transmit a the risk of a
disease to a grandchild without the
parent having that disease apparently
when you think about that Aristotle had
clocked that that's cool yes right so if
you think about that very thoughtfully
you've got to conclude that it's
indivisible because it didn't go away
with the mother or the parent it's got
something remained that across
generations to generations and then
propped up again or cropped again this
idea I mean this was recorded by
Aristotle so that way back in in in
history you clearly have the idea that
there's an indivisible characteristic
something information moving doesn't get
diluted doesn't get broken up doesn't
get sort of chopped up and it's moving
across generations so by the way just to
be clear that that's so important isn't
it because the indivisibility of the
gene which you said would be weird given
that it's made up of all these letters
why can't you but the fact that it can
get passed on means that there's
something kind of nice right there is
something there's something that is
transmitted hold so so and it was and
and you know it's one of the most
striking intellectuals of our times cuz
rocking scholars of our time who failed
virtually all his exams gives us a lot
of help who failed all his exams was
this monk working in a small town in now
the Czech Republic called in Bruno named
Gregor Mendel began to study
systematically this idea whoa what is it
how is it that this characteristic moves
from one organism down one generation to
the next and Mendel's discovery which
was astonishing for its time was that
when he tracked it
it really behaved in this indivisible
manner and much like others had
hypothesized that it didn't get broken
up that when when he watched the
movement through Peas he could almost
abstract it as a particle as something
that was a physical particle he didn't
know what it was made of he had no idea
but think of them put yourself in
Mendel's shoes for a second and this is
what I this is one of the things that I
particularly love to do think of
yourself you know you're a monk in an
Augustinian Abbey you believe that God
made everything and you believe you're
forced to believe you like to believe
that this is how organisms arise
organisms arise because some kind of
seed is laid and they a kind of divine
decree allows you to sort of flower into
this into five hands and sorry five
fingers in each hand and we'll come on
to the notification thing later exactly
so there you are and all of a sudden
based on simple experiments on peas you
begin to realize that in fact
information is moving the things are not
what they appear in fact across every
generation the reason that the pea plant
acquires a purple flower versus a white
flower is because something has passed
on
almost like a physical particle of
information and I liken this in the book
to kind of a whisper someone has said to
the embryo you have got to produce a
pink flower or a purple flower versus a
white flower and that whispered that
idea that action of information then
moves on to the next generation in
undivided so look I'm gonna do something
really really awful at this point which
is I'm going to sort of gymnastic Li
leap over Crick okay Jim Watson love to
leapfrog Watson not at rosalind Franklin
and take it as read that we all know
that the structure beautifully rendered
on the screens around us the double
helix and that's the DNA the four
letters that you talked about that in
code and before we get to the kind of
the
questions that I think we all need to be
wrestling with and you certainly argue
we need to be wrestling with in Kentucky
there are two little bits of recent
progress which I'd like you to talk us
through briefly yes and one is this
gene-editing thing or CRISPR as it's
known and I would like you to do a
little bit on epigenetics Chris cuz I
think these are two things which even
those of us who consider ourselves to be
fairly well versed in the gene thing
would like a little bit more on and then
we'll come to how scared should we be
what are we going to do next and so on
would you mind giving us those two if
you'd agree thank you or something I
will talk about three things actually
I'll just add to this the idea of
prenatal genetic diagnosis that would be
great okay so prenatal genetic diagnosis
CRISPR and just so you know what we're
going guys once we got those down we'll
do the book so you know what a gene is
now approximately it's carried in DNA
this molecule which thankfully was
printed in the right way there's a way
that people often make a mistake to make
it left-handed and this I think is right
good job intelligent good way those of
you on the podcast I know got the slide
online I know I get a plus for that
because it's a terrible error to make it
go the other way around because
molecules
you know like left hands and right hands
these are not super poseable so anyway
this is that I think it's the right it's
the right direction okay
it only coils that way it doesn't coil
this way if that makes any sense to you
anyway
so so if you were to think about that
thing that's up on the stage actually
helps as as a gene it would be as I said
in DNA and would have a CT GC CTG etc
etc coiled along its coils its opposite
strand the mirror image would be a
mirror image of that in a different
different chemical form we don't need to
worry about that okay in that code would
be the code for one gene could code for
could interact with for other genes and
code for the shape of your nose about
seven genes on we now know intersect
with each other and approximately have
interact with the environment and
produce height there were at least seven
or eight about ten or fifteen interact
with each other and interact with the
environment and produce the color of
your skin and so forth some of them are
very unitary some of them
only one gene drives one feature
appearance they're rare the generally
rare most of the other ones sort of talk
to each other and act like machines
molecular machines that will ultimately
result in okay anatomy physiology et
cetera okay that's that's step number
one we know that that what does CRISPR
allow you to do CRISPR is a molecular
machine borrowed from the bacterial
world which allows you to go into that
DNA sequence that long stretch of a C T
and G and switch deliberately switch one
part of the code and replace it
potentially with some additional
modifications replace it with a
different code CRISPR is actually a pair
of scissors there's nothing more fancy
about it it's a pair of scissors it's a
pair of scissors that recognizes one
particular sequence in the human genome
and clips the human genome or any genome
human Clips the human genome are in the
genome at that sequence now remember
when I say one particular sequence what
I'm really thinking about is go back
again to your 66 full sets of the
Encyclopedia Britannica
what CRISPR does is it scans all those
66 sets and says on page 742 line seven
para four it reads a CG GT I'm going to
make a cut in that line and then there
are natural processes in the human cells
in human cells which will try to replace
that information and when you replace
that information you can switch it to a
different kind of information so in
other words you could therefore go into
the 66 volume pick out volume 7 go to
page 746 pick page line one and see I'm
going to replace a CT GC CT for a CT TC
CT that's what CRISPR allows you to do
and just to quick question on Kris Pearn
and we're going to have to go through
this quite fast because you know there's
there's like the future humanity to get
to but you know how surprising is that
so for you know you know when somebody
tells you a story and you're not sure
whether you should go you or not right
so as a geneticist is that really
new and really cool like if someone who
told you ten years ago that was gonna be
possible would you leave them as
geneticists as cancer biologists we had
been dreaming of this technology for now
six decades okay
people had been dreaming of a technology
that would allow you to basically go
into the human genome recognize one part
of it and change it and there was no one
had imagined that anywhere in the world
you would find this technology and it
was hidden it was hidden because and
I'll tell you the lovely story I'll go
through it quickly but it's really worth
knowing yeah it was hidden because in
the bacterial world in the
microbiological world the competition
for survival is so stiff that bacteria
evolved we didn't know about it but
bacteria evolved a mechanism of
delivering lethal hits to viruses that
invade them and the way they deliver
these hits is to cut up the DNA of these
viruses and bacteria because of the
evolutionary pressures it had to be cut
up in one particular place otherwise
they would destroy themselves their own
DNA or they would destroy the wrong DNA
so basically bacteria evolved
unbeknownst to us this pair of molecular
scissors that would recognize as I said
one piece of DNA one sequence of DNA in
a hit in the long stretch and deliver a
lethal cut into it and we suddenly
understood this scientist suddenly began
to understand this and began to realize
that wait a second if you reenact this
if you engineer or re-engineer this
bacterial technology you can suddenly
produce cuts or mutations in the human
genome deliberately that will so again
I'm trying to give us the cost of
characters that we need for the drama
that you argue that we feel we're
playing out right now it's not a drama
from ten years ago so we can now go in
and at will digitally as it were edit
any element of the design much like you
can pick out a volume their encyclopedia
chopped up one piece replace that word
with a different word character you
could say well let me just finish up one
more it's helpful yeah you could say
well who cares
uh-huh well what is that character
was the difference between a normal
version of the Braca one gene brca1 gene
and the gene that causes breast cancer
if you know that if you inherit copies
two copies of that brca1 gene your
chance of getting breast cancer in your
lifetime was 80% that's where it begins
to matter what if that was that volume 7
page 19 was the sequence of the cystic
fibrosis gene or a gene that carried a
hundred percent chance of giving you
Huntington's disease all of a sudden
this business of editing the human
genome rubbing out ACTG
and making it a ttg becomes extremely
consequential because you're dictating
the fate of a child and unborn child
potentially who has a risk of breast
cancer or Huntington's disease and
deciding that I'm going to erase that
and replace it with something new keep
that thought so in print plantation
genetic diagnosis I think that's been
around for a little while you see look
at the embryo before it's implanted and
you check it out and if it's got certain
things you don't want then you don't put
it in and if it hasn't got none of the
things you don't still do put it in
roughly roughly speaking so if you think
of CRISPR as writing because you're
you're erasing things and replacing it
with new code so you can write the human
genome you can think about
pre-implantation genetic diagnosis as
reading the human genome why is that
make sense again going back to our
simple analogy you have your
encyclopedia and all of a sudden you
decide you know that again depress the
point in volume 7 there is a code that
tells you 80 tgc that tells you that
your child will have a heightened risk
for breast cancer and now instead of
using CRISPR or any other new fancy
technologies you say what if I could
detect that in a fetus or in a before a
fetus is implanted and I just won't
implant that fetus I just read the
genome the entirety of the genome and I
say I just decide I'm gonna not be saw
I'm gonna no I'm gonna decide not to
implant that you know that do you know
an implantation is kind of in the
context of artificial insemination in
vitro fertilization but you could
imagine doing that potential
for a first thesis that was conceived
naturally that's right exactly cool so
now with pre-implantation genetic
diagnosis you can basically subtract
information from your lineage you could
say that of all the sets of
encyclopedias that I could potentially
carry forward into the next generation
I'm going to choose only this one and
I'm going to eliminate all the other
ones and in doing so you would eliminate
certain words which were in certain sets
does that make sense
it's kind of obvious so it's a
subtractive technique CRISPR can
certainly be used to subtract you can
take information away you can rub it
away but it's also more powerfully an
additive technique you can add
information back to the genome we've
never had that ability really to do that
properly before they've been attempts to
do it so it's an added technique so
that's CRISPR pre-implantation genetic
diagnosis
I'm loving the bit I get so dr. mukajee
to do now epigenetics okay epigenetics
is a layer of information it's a very
controversial topic okay epigenetics is
a layer of information that is so the
genome every cell in your body inherits
the same genome give or take ok in that
sense we think of the genome for an
individual's kind of being fixed it's a
there was this cropping around the thing
with the sperm and the egg and then you
get your genome and that's you genome
and there you go that's right yeah
however a red blood cell looks totally
different from a neuron if they would
exchange their properties your body
would go mad right you would not have
anybody so something must be telling the
genome to use different genes in
different contexts and allow certain
genes to be activated in their neuron
certain genes to be activated in your
blood cells etc etc in the broadest
sense epigenetics refers to the idea
that human beings when they evolve when
they when cells arise from human beings
and they become acquire different
identities that different parts of the
human genomes are activated and
inactivated differently now how does
this happen
happens through a variety of processes
one thing the biggest thing is
particular proteins come and tell genes
in your brain cells to turn on certain
sets of genes and turn off other sets of
genes so that's probably the biggest
process that happens other processes
that are more controversial that also
happened is that the genome once it's
activated certain genes and inactivated
certain other genes in your brain cell
verses your blood cells it also attaches
chemical tags or physical tags to the
genome and whether those impact or don't
impact the way that genes are changed in
your is is very controversial and
controversial the extent that you've
actually I mean you've got slammed for
talking about this in some ways and big
controversies interesting again for
those of us outside the domain is that
something which people do argue about
within so much passion is the
consequence of that is that people argue
about how genes are regulated how our
genes there's a paper today that
actually even addresses this controversy
it turns out that these master
regulatory proteins so-called
transcription factors are not autonomous
we're learning about them more and more
every day yesterday there was a paper
which showed that if you eliminate those
if you just fiddle with those chemical
marks you can turn genes on and off
autonomously so there's a lot of passion
about this because so far we have not
been able to turn genes on and off in
certain cells at will that's why it
matters could you change a neuron into a
into a blood cell it's not so easy to do
even though they have exactly the same
genome could you turn a degenerating
cell a cell that's dying into a cell
that comes alive and lives forever not
so easy to do they both are the same
genome so what makes the difference
between one and the other well it's that
layer of information about the genome
it's clear that these master regulatory
proteins have a big role in this the
question is whether you know these
chemical tags and physical tags have any
role because in fact we can toggle those
much more easily okay
so I want to do a quick gear change now
and and you know in my head is the fact
of your being a Pulitzer Prize winning
author is very interesting to me and I'm
someone also who's been interested in
straddling the divide that we talk about
the two cultures the art and science
thing and those of you that will have
heard of the two cultures will probably
know that it comes down to a bloke
called CP snow who argued of these two
cultures and I think the way in our
society that's thought of is about
scientists and artists being different
hanging out in different clubs talking
in different ways but CP snow it turns
out wasn't too concerned with culture in
the sense that we talked about now but
he was involved in the immediate post
Second World War period in the nuclear
age yes so he was very concerned about
atomic power and nuclear weapons yes and
a concern that he had was that
politicians particularly on the public
not being scientifically literate would
make it impossible for them to make
decisions about the application of that
age of nuclear technology which was in
his view of the biggest moral and
ethical concern of his age and could
result in the annihilation of our
species you write in your book about a
letter that Einstein produced to
Roosevelt where he said we have all the
pieces this was in before the bomb was
made we have all the pieces necessary to
create a bomb and and suggesting that
Rousseau ought to sit up and take notice
you know how exercised are you about
public knowledge of these domains and
what are the things that you think we
should be worried about now resulting
from these recent advances in technology
that will affect us our children you
know and where decisions need to be made
by as it governments is it the UN don't
know what give us a couple of vignettes
if you will look let me begin that with
a question it's a thought experiment let
me begin that with a question that I'm
going to throw out to the audience
and I'm going to ask the audience to
think about let's say you have two
daughters and let's say we could predict
with a 10% chance the daughters are
healthy they're growing they're 11 and 6
years old and let's say you could
predict with a 10 percent fidelity in
one daughter that she would develop the
risk of being schizophrenic
by the time she
was twenty years old they're perfectly
fine now would it change the way you
think about your two daughters right
let's see I increase the number to 50%
the 50% chance that she would develop
some other illness lethal potential
illness debilitating illness by the time
she was 20 or 30 which would it change
the way you think about her two
daughters yes now here's the second
question if it was 10% chance if it was
that 10% chance would you want to know
no yes no for those of you lost world
we've had some yeses and some knows from
your eyes if it was a 78% chance would
you want to know right this is the world
that we are going to enter our children
this will be one of it may not be the
most it will be one of the most
important questions that a future
generation will have will be asking
itself our generation is already asking
itself you know why is it that at 75%
risk they're perfectly healthy now why
is it at 75% risk you want to know where
is that 10% risk you don't want to know
what is it about I mean the answer is
kind of obvious Oh beginner the risk
increases we want to be sure about the
future but what makes the difference let
me ask you let me ask you a question
what is the science or the domain of
inquiry that would answer the question
you just asked right so you're a cancer
doctor you're a geneticist you're a
writer but it doesn't feel to me as if
any of those things I mean those things
equip you to understand them technically
and in your book and in your life you
talk about your family your family
history and gets free new mental illness
and so on but who is it who should be
looking at the question of when people
want to know these things understanding
it better helping to educate is that a
question for sociologists is the
question for politicians is it a
question for anthropologist it's not a
genetic question well most importantly
it's a question for everyone because if
you don't participate in that question
you will miss out on your voice in that
question it's a question that we need to
ask
you know it's a question that we need to
ask children with Down syndrome it's a
question that we need to ask men and
women who have men who have and men and
women who carry the Braca one gene it's
a question me to ask people who read
literature it's a question we need to
ask those who think about what suffering
means lose us what normalcy means what
is where we go to draw the lines who's
gonna put an arrow and say Huntington's
disease suffering death of potentials
you know grief and suffering here's a
line but sexual orientation not to make
silly comparisons not part of that
debate outside that debate I help us
because I mean you know the question of
whether you do paracetamol or ibuprofen
when you've got a headache is you know
it's a question but it's not one where
we really feel we all ought to inform
ourselves and educate and which what's
the fundamental difference do you think
that means this is a question of
paracetamol or ibuprofen it's not a
question of who we are this is a
question that helps us define who we are
how we will define ourselves who are we
going to choose to be what is going to
be allowable who's going to be who's
going to allow the allowable and if you
think this is far away oh you know this
is abstraction who thinks about all of
this let me remind this audience that in
parts of India and China this experiment
is already unfolding the experiment it
already unfolded there are 800 women - a
thousand men that's on the basis of
genetic diagnosis in selection it's not
someone else's problem this is about
killing girls that's right and and so
it's not so it's it and that is a that
is a dis genic project it is the largest
district project in human history
training this genic means using I mean
you it comes from the word eugenics
which is to so-called better the human
population I believe and I think most
people would believe in this in in this
country that this is this genic in the
sense that it uses genetic technologies
to produce populations that are
ideal that words that reflect a kind of
perverse desire and if you ask as I did
in this book if you ask the people in
some of you know who've studied these
cultures who've studied these areas it's
not across all of India is actually
quite focused on a particular northern
edge of India they believe that bringing
a girl child into the world
represents for that child extraordinary
suffering they feel that she is that she
would undergo extraordinary suffering
and therefore that justifies to them to
limit that extraordinary suffering now
to this audience you would say that
sounds patently perverse and yet these
desires these fantasies have already
circulated around the world more than
once they have circulated around the
world in the in Europe in the UK where
the term eugenics was born and they will
I guarantee you they will circulate
around the world yet again as eugenics
as the desire to make children who do
not suffer becomes personalized a
personalized variation of eugenics using
a combination of as I said before
genetic and potentially epigenetic
technologies pre-implantation genetic
diagnosis and maybe CRISPR in the future
now one more thing before we come out
and I mean that you're kind of freaking
everyone out a little bit here with the
whole infant side thing and and and the
disease stuff so let me ask you to do a
little bit on the positive side if I may
and I'm not being pollyannaish here so
you know you've talked about diseases
that you might or might not want to know
about and you've regarded being a woman
as untold suffering which must be
avoided at all costs what are the kinds
of things which we might be looking to
this technology to allow us to do the
top better and most of the new vaccines
that you're getting are the result of
genetic technologies not all of them but
many of the new vaccines that that
prevent tremendously debilitating
diseases around the world are the
product of new genetic technologies the
idea that you could eliminate
parasitic diseases by changing the
animals that carry parasitic diseases
mosquitoes for instance is a genetic
technology most of us who've undergone
therapy for breast cancer or for
leukemia or for lymphoma our
beneficiaries of genetic technology most
of us who've undergone screening for
breast cancer because there is a breast
cancer gene in our family and thereby
caught early cancers are the children as
it were of genetic technologies the idea
that you can diagnose cystic fibrosis
and potentially prevent having decided
not to have a child even though you and
your spouse may both carry the one of
the genes for cystic fibrosis is the
product with genetic technologies and
pre-implantation genetic diagnosis
tay-sachs disease the decision not to
bear a child in this a personal decision
to have with Down syndrome it's a
personal decision if you had if you
indulge in that decision if you made
that decision you've already become part
of this genetic technology you know it's
right raise your hands I'm sorry the
question raise your hands if you have
thought about or actually performed an
amniocentesis to look at whether your
child may or may not have had Down
syndrome or know someone this we've
already we've already entered we have
already entered for all of you and your
families you've already entered the
genetic age it's not far away from you
you've already entered it in your book
you you quoted a description which I
hadn't heard before which I think's
rather lovely the chapter about them
through the looking-glass
so the Alice in Wonderland thing and I
suppose you've still sound to me as if
you're talking like a doctor because the
when I asked you for some positive stuff
you talked about all these diseases we
might not have any more right ultimately
putting doctors out of business but
again before I come which is you know
it's a grim prospect clearly for you but
the the the I wonder whether there are
things outside of disease and medicine
which we ought to be thinking about in
terms of enhancement we jokingly refer
to five hands before is this the time to
be thinking about improving us
beyond simply the avoidance of pain and
disease in your view so that's an
important question it's not a great
question I've thought about the question
I find it hard again I'm doing my best
I've thought about it obviously a lot
it's hard for me to imagine as a
physician particular Mina that's my
practice my day-to-day life I find it
hard to imagine doing that without
violating certain things that we know
about human beings I mean in other words
what I'm trying to say is that problems
we have enough that to imagine
enhancement beyond problem seems to be a
second-order question it would be a kind
of 2.0 question and I find it hard to
imagine that given what we know about
genes given what we fundamentally know
about genes that they don't usually act
as widget makers that's an important
distinction you know people used to
think in the 1950s maybe that genes were
widget makers it was like a a blueprint
in other words that you had a blueprint
much like a blueprint you know you read
a blueprint and it says you know 3
centimeters above the axial place a nut
and a screw and tighten it and when you
made your device 3 centimeters above the
thing you would place your nut in the
screw and you tighten it that's a
blueprint genes generally speaking are
more like recipes so in other words and
you finally bake a cake you can't say
well 3 centimeters above the raisin on
the far left hand corner there was a
specification for putting a second
raisin right we don't find the Great
British Bake Off here but yes genes
interact so in other words the way of
cake happens is that you put a whole
bunch of things together they in a
particular temperature in a particular
context and you end up getting a process
which is ultimately results in a cake
Gene's mostly behave like that and
because of that reason you can't say
pluck the raisin out of that and all of
a sudden you'll have everything else
left the same whereas you can do that
with a widget right so my fear is that
if as far as enhancement is concerned we
know so little right now about the
developmental Cascades
of what results in a human being that
ultimately will end up screwing up the
recipe in more fundamental ways and just
to finish that example we will say add
one tenth of the butter to the cake as
it were but you know that if you add one
tenth to the butter you don't get a one
tenth butter cake you get no cake you
get a collapsed mess right and so that's
that the analogy helps us to realize
that process-oriented things that are
developmental or neurodevelopmental or
bio developmental Cascades it's
generally harder to intervene on them
without having many many unintended
consequences we've seen that happen
before
I'm very very final question before we
come to the floor and that is you know
so we're quite good I think in this
country human fertilization embryology
authorities I think understand to be
well regarded globally as a as a way in
which we think about these things as a
society and legal framework and what's
allowed and not allowed to do is
regulated in that way and I believe you
have similar mechanisms in America what
you can publish in a journal nature and
science is regulated by certain ethical
codes as well not wishing to pick on
China but I mean you know in China for
example are they just pushing on and
doing stuff outside of that kind of
framework is there an international
dimension to what people are and aren't
playing with right now and does that be
strong international dimension and first
of all the Chinese have their own
important code it's not that they're
working like robes outside the code it's
just that their codes are not the same
as ours they don't hold I mean I talked
about in the book if they don't hold the
same sanctity to they don't have the
same idea of psyche they're different
idea it's not that they don't think this
actually at all he said they didn't have
a different idea of sanctity of the
embryo and therefore certain things are
intervene able and certain things are
not intervene about the Chinese
experiment that was done which tried to
alter human genome in about 70 embryos
was actually done relatively carefully
these embryos were picked and they were
picked for the cutoff or for the fact
that they wouldn't normally undergo full
development because of certain
abnormalities so it was actually
carefully done that said now that the
proof of principle has been done
next natural step would be let's try it
in a real old embryo with potentially
real problem you know so let's take an
embryo potentially with a terrifying
disease like you know one of these
diseases that causes hemophilia right
and why don't we correct that gene so
it's not as if there is no code
operational it's that there are
different codes operational and they
depend on the religious and scientific
cultures of these individual places so
we've got to have a common code
otherwise this would become an arms race
people in the United States are already
worried that if we if we give this away
to places like China and Korea and India
and other places where their different
moral codes that are acceptable then we
will lose this arms race and it's too
important to give away so I think we
need an international dialogue if we
need an international dialogue we need
the vocabulary we need to understand why
it's important if we need the vocabulary
you need to read don't read my book but
read with several books about it so that
you can then come to the stage and say I
understand where we are I have an under
I've put a stake down I know what a gene
is I know how easy or complicated it is
to order them I know what it means to
order the mind I know the history I know
what has happened the fantasies of
altering genes in the past
I know those fantasies are likely to be
repeated therefore I conclude that these
are the boundaries that I will set for
us and for the world I was in the States
during the race when George W Bush was
running for president and he was came
out against stem-cell research yes and
I've been campaigning for years but
science should be part of culture should
be part of polish we used to discuss it
I remember complaining to a friend of
mine who was the political corresponds
to the ABC about the fact that George W
Bush was again stem cell research he
said dude you can't have it both ways
right if you want it to be part of
politics then they may be ruling on in a
way that you don't agree with yeah you
know so like the fact that his part of
politics means that it can be a
political decision that you don't agree
with and they do you know give up
control to the politicians of that's
right but the important thing is of
course politicians are us they're not
them the minute we think of themselves
as them and asked of course we make we
lose the fundamental quality of what it
means
representation very good politicians are
otherwise folks and Christian comments
now we'll do it with microphones please
make yourselves visible in some way by
waving something we'll take them in
batches folks and also to say them
it's not necessarily the case that we
will answer in detail everything that's
raised it's as much to hear from you as
to assuage your concerns please if you
have a consultation the doctor is not in
so please do not bring your your your
personal or family medical problems to
the fore at this stage yes there's a
wave over there let's let's try that
so perhaps tangentially related to the
talk but as soon to be parents
blood cord stem cell storage companies
private companies that store stem cells
from the blood cord is this can you shed
some light on this I mean we've done a
research and read but what do you think
of collecting stem cells of babies from
the blood okay I'm gonna get you to
buffer these all tronic and it's a blood
cord stem cell buffering Yes Doctor I
just want to say in the star of your
book you tell a very emotive tale about
your cousin money and for me that felt
like we were going beyond the empirical
realm of the gene and going towards the
metaphysics of what it can actually do
to us as a society so do you believe
with this you know fast pace scientific
discoveries that are happening have we
as you know moral thinkers and social
you know philosophers and ethicists have
we keeping up with the discoveries that
are happening and if we don't will it
have negative implications on the future
thank you that's a nice question and one
more anyone else on that side yeah go on
let's get some ladies in next sir please
yep in your personal opinion should we
wipe out the Anopheles mosquito oh is
that the what's that one that's the one
that's doing what man area and oh that
one yeah yeah also good wasps can we get
rid of wasps as well that would be great
I think
yeah I never know okay so you you can
take all or any of those in any order
you like well let me talk about the
mosquito first I'll keep the stem-cell
question for later well I'll answer the
metaphysics question a little bit so
excuse an interesting question actually
I have a conversation with people Bill
Gates which is coming out you can find
it in YouTube maybe early next month he
reviewed the gene and the mosquitoes so
I read a lot to prep for this
conversation and as you know I actually
don't go every conversation with Bill
Gates exactly I don't go into great
detail about GMOs in this book because
it would really requires a new book a
separate book and I think is an
important book to write someone else to
write it but mosquitoes I'm told and as
I understand it particularly in awful
ease is a very unique situation where
when ecologists and other entomologists
insect people have looked to ask the
question is the mosquito useful people
have come up with the answer no not
really you can't find any use for the
mosquito it's not a keystone species
it's not required for the survival of
another species it is unusual situation
where this animal has really learned to
parasitize or I should say feed on
mammals and carry forward diseases that
are very devastating to humans and other
animals so in in the unusual case and I
think it's a very unusual because in the
unusual case would be enough filiz
mesquite or perhaps even the Zika
carrying a de T would be the rare
circumstance where you could make the
case for genetically modifying organisms
where and and not have a unintended
impact on ecology so widespread that we
would never be able to recover it you're
familiar with the onion that this
rhetorical newspaper has a brilliant
headline scientists announce
breakthrough that partially solves
problem created by previously announced
breakthrough
no I should talk about them in the book
a little bit you know no one thought
that introducing you know what harm
would there be for a few rabbits to run
around Australia you know would we
really care be nice food for one people
some people once in a while
it's cetera et cetera I can give you a
thousand examples now this is this has
been studied I would say that there is a
case to be made and you know the
devastation is enormous malaria is
enormous
as you know there is a plan and then one
experiment to do this for ATC gypped I
in the Caribbean and subsequently in the
United States so we'll watch to see what
happened the genetics of this one so as
RJ so we could do it with like really
powerful you know bug spray or swatters
or something but is there a genetic
solution to that you know come under the
kind of friends that give pause that's
worried in fact the there's some debate
a lot of controversy about this in fact
you know I had a conversation with
people who are reading this until
recently there was not a lot of evidence
that bug sprays etc spraying worked at
all okay in fact most of those were
negative so if we've run out of those
kinds of solutions the genetic solution
would be to equip maybe the female or
the male mosquito doesn't matter depends
on how you want to do it with some gene
that basically renders their offspring
sterile so that you would basically have
a dead lineage every time that mosquito
reproduce you'd release these mosquitoes
they're marked as you know as you may
know they're marked with a jellyfish
gene that makes them glow red they're
not visible normally but under the
microscope you can figure out as the
population is changing you could trap
them and watch the population change you
could give them you could equip these
mosquitoes with a little extra Drive so
that they reproduce a little bit faster
and this is a this is a people have very
very thoughtful people have thought
about exactly exactly this to eradicate
malaria whether it works or not is a
question what is unintended consequences
or is a question well there is a
terrible disease dengue is I had dengue
I was in bed for three months it's a
terrible disease so these are these are
not to be taken lightly
you want to do cold blood or you want to
do metaphysics I'll do metaphysics just
to
so the question is roughly so it's about
you know so the book it contains stories
and you referred from the bleakly in
your much so far about your own family
and I think you know one of the nice
things about a story and this whole
story is that it does relate to all of
us as individuals you can throughout
your not there as a cancer doctor you're
not there as a geneticist and I suppose
in a sense the issues that you raised do
have resonance for all of us in terms of
how we think about ourselves how we
think about our parents
how I think about our children's how we
think about sighted children what you
know the if you look as someone who's
thought about this particularly with my
with my previous work etcetera if you
look it's almost always that there's
that metaphysics and technology in
particular or in a kind of cycle with
each other one doesn't even exist
without the other questions that are
raised that were raised once we began to
have instruments that resemble human
intelligence are unique questions to
that moment you could have thought about
them beforehand but there will be
abstraction but all of a sudden you know
when we have that moment you suddenly
begin to realize that this question has
an important consequence metaphysical
dimension and so it is with genes you
know we've people have thought about for
a while kind of abstractly what it would
mean to influence the human genome and
people have written about it great
writers have written about it is
actually you know George Orwell others
have thought about this idea but now all
of a sudden it becomes a very concrete
reality and so therefore the
metaphysical challenge is this
philosophical challenge is what do we do
who'd we define as normal how is there
going to be a an appointed body of
individuals that says you know that
these forms of prenatal genetic
diagnosis and/or implantation are
allowed those are not allowed these are
these it said you know who's going to be
in that is are you going to give as I
said before the voice to someone who has
a potentially lethal genetic disease is
that person going to be represented and
is that going to be that person
represented adequately in that in that
voice so these questions I think are
becoming more urgent as we discover the
frontiers of the technology I'm afraid
we don't have answers to these questions
right now the book tries to give an
answer by the way I can talk about that
in a second so you want to move on to
the next batch sure okay cool and
there's one up there I believe am i
right in thinking that someone was we
were waving just randomly all right I
can't see yeah yeah I could yeah yeah
good ask you what your opinion is where
you draw the line because some genes
also confers a protection against
malaria and as we've been talking about
that's a big problem and so where do you
draw the line with which genes you would
go to protect against which you wouldn't
and how would you then go about
informing treatment to a patient yeah
the story of sickle cell gene disease
and actually it's in the book is an
informative story because you could ask
the question well why on earth do we
have sickle cell anemia and part of the
answer which has come out from a from
evolutionary scientists is that it turns
out we think now that having
particularly having one allele or one
gene of or carrying one variant of that
sickle cell gene may protect you from
malaria whereas having you know of
course it also sets your children up for
having the risk of the disease so
similarly people have asked the question
why is that why does a cystic fibrosis
mutation even exist in human populations
well again in that case there's a
thought that having one group that one
allele of that cystic fibrosis gene when
you have two of them of course you have
the disease but having one protects the
lethal infections of cholera and other
kinds of abdominal but in answering this
question I do you think the question is
posed it in an interesting way so she
said you decide and then she referred to
you as a clinician yeah would you
recommend us of course of treatment but
I think this is tricky right so what
you've done is you've answered with a
just so story
yeah and Roger cool thing about to tell
stories in a row and depending on how
convincing we find those just-so stories
about whether they say good mutation or
bad mutation we might consider
exercising it or not it's really a
satisfactory procedure for deciding the
things that we are or aren't gonna do
with this technology no I think the more
satisfactory procedure for dealing with
this technology is to ask the question
do we need to make a germline suffix
playing a few words that are relevant
here there are two ways to alter genes
one way to alter genes is to alter them
such that you change them in the sperm
and eggs and therefore it becomes
permanently imprinted in the human
genome and every generation thereby to
come in the future will carry that
genetic change that's called germline
gene changes whatever it might be
another way to change the human genome
is to say okay I'm not going to do this
in the germline I'm only going to affect
the cells that are affected so in
sickle-cell it would just be the blood
cells that are affected so in fact if
you were to think about it for diseases
like sickle cell the much much simpler
solution
technically technologically and perhaps
even ethically is to say that we're
gonna make the change in the blood cells
alone you have the luxury of doing that
in that particular disease in sickle
cell anemia and I'm going to concentrate
my efforts and we're largely constantly
my efforts on changing blood cells so
that the patient with sickle cell anemia
now carries sickle cell anemia as it
were in his or her body except in the
cells that are most severely affected
and that's in blood now you could say
well that's a weaselly solution so it's
the or limiting the the consequences of
the decision but you're not addressing
the question of which things you would
do which things you wouldn't know in the
first place that's right but it's
important to recognize that these these
are easily solutions are probably the
most practical renditions so that's what
we would do first that's what I think we
should do first night the second
question should be eliminate the sickle
cell gene the mutant sickle cell gene
completely sodium generations
the human genome I don't know the answer
I don't know the-the-the
in the book our I do describe what we
know historically is that there's a kind
of triangle as it were of forces that
have allowed us to make these decisions
and it's important to note that the
realms of that triangle one is that the
disease should cause extraordinary
suffering in the in in being inherited
through the germline now you could say
well your definition of extraordinary
suffering is not the same as mine and
absolutely it's not the same as mine
it's changing all the time but at least
the standard is that the suffering
should be extraordinary that there
should be something to tell us that what
the consequence of having that gene
causes a a a massive disruption of what
we would consider a normal human life
yep so that's one you have been being
born female right that's right so number
two that that we understand as clearly
as we can is we can possibly can that
actually changing that gene will have a
one-to-one relationship with what
ultimately happens and not affect the
whole so that we don't have all these
potentially unintended consequences of
eliminating malaria and finding that
something awful has happened there's a
consequence of that so we have and one
way of saying this is also to say that
these the penetrance our understanding
that the gene will actually exert its
effects in a one-to-one manner is very
high number two and number three is that
we know from the history now and more
historically as opposed to biologically
that we know that mandating any of these
choices is a terrible idea
particularly mandating it from the state
when states mandate this they make
terrible choices so it's generally
better to leave these decisions to
individuals they may choose or not
choose to have a child with a with the
potentially devastating medical
condition they may choose to have that
child but mandating it at any point of
time is so so this is a generally safe
triangle with sickle-cell disease
we have other solutions we have other
potentials so it doesn't really fit in
that triangle that's very good and yeah
for somewhere there it'll take
yes sir well whoever it is human genome
kits where you can kind of carry out the
test on yourself and gives you results
which may not be accurate but given that
it is your own information you have
access to it without someone else yeah
doctors be gatekeepers like that over
there because I know that so far it's
it's seen as less powerful to actually
go ahead and kill bacteria but more
powerful to inactivate genes that cause
variants and I was just wondering if you
think this is something that the
bacteria would eventually evade or if
there's a future for it so yeah so
you're gonna put the microbiologist out
of business and then I'm do like to save
another view from the gods
yes all right so basically I've been
talking about how CRISPR and using the
genome can be used to eradicate disease
but what do you think about producing
like designer babies if a consumer wants
to create their child to have say a fast
metabolism so they can't be as fat you
know or change the eye color or hair
color should that be allowed or should
you kind of keep a lock on that because
then that could be a slippery slope and
so should we pop microbiology we want to
do that one quickly let's come to
microphone because these should you guys
be the gatekeepers should you know who
he is done who he is sent off for a
genetic test of interest who if you've
sent off for 23andme or one of them
online other products to exist put your
hands up so wow we got like less than
10% of unions well you didn't need to
because you're in a actually I decided
not okay cool
all right so should we have access to it
and should we be modifying so the quick
answer is that right now these
technologies especially the sequencing
technology is easy that's the easy part
reading a CT GC TTC is very easy it's
how much because right now I mean in
your lab so if you understand one if I
want to do the entire human the active
part of the human genome it's about
$1,200 $1,200 yeah
our 23andme has does some sub parts of
it or even cheaper etc etcetera
you give or take yeah the first genome
by the way cost about three billion yeah
the full genome most of the Moore's law
isn't in terms of the reduction so Oh
okay so that's the background the
problem is not that the problem is not
sequencing getting sequence is easy the
analogy is you know if you put your
child and you put them in front of a
book right and at age three that child
can say that's the letter A that's the
letter C that's a little Q etc etc etc
they would have not one bit of
understanding of what those sequence of
letters meant they wouldn't know
therefore what the plot of the book was
with the moral of the stories where the
lesson is and what the historical
context of interpreting that lesson is
so we are sort of like the children who
are reading a in in our case a C T and G
and occasionally we can make out this
combination of letters means that but
that our vocabulary for that has about
six or seven words and there's a big you
know there's king there's Richard the
third sitting in front of us so you can
read the word that you can read the word
King you can read the word you know
clown and now you're asked to say to
yourself do you understand the
significance of this play right that's
where most of the technology is sitting
right now it's it's at the toolkit stage
so for me in particular I have a great
great incentive to do this I wanted to
know is there a risk for me or for my
children to have an increased risk of a
mental illness
it just wasn't there we don't know what
that will be and I'm John Cesare it will
be when we come to it it'll be
probabilistic it'll be that kind of
situation ten percent risk
twelve percent risk it has to do
something with the environment some
component of the environment has to be
sort of factored in as well so so you
advise people not to use these I mean
they're not gonna tell you what to do
but you you think it should still come
be coming through a medical gatekeeper I
think it should be I think that it
should be done preferably on a trial
basis it should be done in a way that
information is recorded and sent back so
in a way it's useful it doesn't become a
kind of free-for-all I think the
information is helpful when you do have
a notable family history of a disease
that's when it becomes useful but in in
my case with most chronic diseases
whether you know that there's not one
gene and the genes haven't identified
for me right now that's not it's not
useful at this point of time you should
little
just for a change so let me tell you
where my I think the the trajectory or
the vector of my fear is my I think the
first thing that will happen is height
I think height because of the nature of
the genetics I think the first thing
that we will try to to do through
prenatal genetic diagnosis I I'm afraid
will be to parse out the six or seven or
eight genes we know that they're about
eight or nine of them which have strong
influences on height and they will try
to influence them and I suspect that
they will try to influence them in
cultures where there's a premium placed
on taller individuals so okay so that's
sort of speculation but this gives this
makes you worried or this is just you're
gonna invest in the company that cracks
the high genes no I think it makes me if
I were in a polian I'd be very worried I
wouldn't I would cease to exist yeah it
makes me very worried it makes me very
worried because it creates a culture of
normalizing it creates a culture of
homogenizing it takes it it perverts the
idea of human potential it says that the
human potential lives in certain
inherited features which we have spent a
vast amount of our culture trying to
resist
we have spent decades of our culture
trying to precisely negate and resist
that idea that your potential lives
infinitely in some kind of aspect of
your physical appearance within bounds I
think it's a very it would be a very
worrisome phenomenon and this is why you
whether you're tall or short whether you
are female or male whether you know
whatever however you wherever you come
from need to be part of that
conversation because if you're not then
someone will say look we have this
company what wrong are we doing you know
what's a little bit of height between
friends research so you come you come
across quite in contemporary politics
quite nanny stately right I mean you you
do think that this stuff should be
regulated and controlled or moderated in
some central way right I mean that's
that's that's what if that you're deaf
Nishan of a nanny state then yes you
know if it's the definition of a nanny
state that we should not be making
viruses carrying human oncogenes yes
that's the nanny state that I want
absolutely but but that is a that is
that is not the standard definition of a
nanny state in other words the if if the
definition of a nanny state is to help
us police and understand the outer
limits of dangerous biological
interventions that have the capacity to
erode our culture that we have spent so
much time investing in creating sure
that's the nanny state I want very good
anymore from anymore maybe one last
question so banging yes the stem cell
thinking so you know it's it's a it's a
slightly difficult question to ask
because we don't know what the potential
of these stem cells is for the future so
give us those I don't know why would
anyone want to consider banking the
embryonic stem cells from their blood
stem cells you can bang potentially you
could make other kinds of stem cells out
of them they have a relatively limited
use right now they're used in
transplantation if the child would get
the rare and on the rare occasion would
get a leukemia cancer occasionally if
they would have a cancer that would
require severe chemotherapy if you feel
as if you know you have you you are at
that level of risk aversion for your
child I would say do that banking but
realize that right now the technology
really is limited to the use of these
cells for the transplantation of
children that have life-threatening
leukemic diseases which is a small
number of cases very very rare disease
in children right we're in the middle
there and then we'll come to the front
yes ma'am my question is sort of medical
half ethical we have a friend who is in
the middle of Huntington's discussion
yes obviously that is binary you either
do or don't what do you mean what is
binary is that is
lifted notice you either have it the
gene or you don't yes okay so the
problem is if they are tested they then
have to report it
from an insurance point of view okay so
there is no motivation to actually ask
the question now does at what point in
terms of the genetic research do I not
want to know because it is going to
potentially affect my access to medical
care later on in life and I'm gonna yep
okay well good so so right now as you
know in the United States if you get
tested outside if you're not asked to be
tested your decision to reveal that
information is your is a private
decision in fact even if you were to be
tested for Braca one a brca1 etc your
decision not to reveal the reveal that
information is a private decision and if
we are to continue our current insurance
system and there's a big if there we can
talk about that separately it seems to
me that that decision should be left
private otherwise we will divide the
world into different medical classes and
the whole point of insurance will begin
to collapse the whole point of insurance
is to combine risk in a way that allows
you to combine risk before information
is available combine risk or pooled
risks such that if you were you know
people who read rolls would be familiar
with this that the whole point of
insurance occurs before the veil or or
while the veil of ignorance still exists
if we all knew when we were gonna die
there would be no market for life that's
right if we all knew exactly when we
were going to die we were we would not
have any mechanism of having life
insurance because of course you would
know and the premiums would change based
on that now the other question that you
could be asking and you have asked
implicitly in your question is does the
new form of understanding genetics force
us to rethink insurance should the
person with Huntington's disease be
pooled with someone else who has another
lethal disease or someone else who has
Huntington's disease that's a decision
that genetics will never solve for you
it will only give you information
what the relative life expectancy or
risk is for an individual individual who
has that illness or disease the
questions of how we choose to ensure
each other is a question that comes from
social contract building and social
contract building is a decision that is
a political and humanistic decision we
have decided to build social contracts
around things like insurance because we
believe at the fundamental level that
all human beings come with a a level
playing ground of risk and that should
one acquire greater risk then the pool
of monies that enter that that pool
should be deployed to help you through
that period of risk I'm loving the idea
of life insurance as being the bit we
know we're getting metaphysical when it
comes down to life insurance or so the
question that I would pull up pull out
is that as we get deeper and deeper
medical information this is actually
very relevant question the gene April 4
for instance has a powerful has powerful
risks associated for disease should we
should the insurance companies be asked
to then divide human beings into two
classes of those that carry the gene and
don't carry the gene and therefore have
two different premiums attached to it
that would overturn the way we've
thought about insurance for the history
of insurance really trivial question
which just occurs to me what what's the
name of the gene that you just said a
pony for how are these names chosen what
are they even mean is there some
committee somewhere because like with
hurricanes they you know there's this
they've got the Huracan George and
Matthew about to hit 80 names these
things and what do they even mean well
biologists named and based on their
function you know is there a committee
can you just know committee there is no
committee right now you get to name you
get to name the if you discover them you
named any name I found we have found has
found novel functions two genes had
already had names which would belie
their names in fact they're the opposite
of their name right now you've been
called John but I just think Matthew is
a much better family yeah
generally of course we try to stick to
Convention and try to try to respect the
first person who named azim who may or
may not have been right you know the
jeans are often named for absurd reasons
you know BRCA Braca 1 or BRCA 1 because
of its association with breast cancer
BRCA Sophia other genes are named you
know Huntington's disease is named
because it is related to that gene you
know the gene that causes that
metabolizes cholesterol has a funny name
HM G Co a funny in a peculiar funny haha
genetics jokes so which are the
implications when a private company
technically owns your genetic
information going back to the insurance
companies well in Canada there is no law
to prevent genetic discrimination so
what happens yeah so I should say in the
history I mean just to give the
historical context this thing has been
this question has been very alive from
the beginning of the Human Genome
Project there was a battle around that
so you know who owns that information
the answer is well what happens when
private companies on the information the
the answer of course is that you know
companies like 23andme have have been
very with great alacrity have have told
their consumers that that information
will never be released that they are
under no obligation whatsoever to
release it to an insurer you so in other
words you you're an insurance company
you're a BlueCross BlueShield you cannot
call out 23andme and say can you tell me
whether you have happened to have a
mutation and brca1 or brca2 you cannot
do that 23
has no obligation and if it were to be
asked it will fight a legal battle and
will win that legal battle as far as we
never mind hacking iCloud for nude
photos let's hack the Jean companies and
work out work so that has actually been
raised that question has been raised
what did they get hacked yeah and now
start releasing information and that
information becomes public it's an
important concern I mean you're hacking
Yahoo you could certainly hack any of
the servers there have been now all
sorts of new mechanisms most of these
private consumer companies have new
mechanisms to anonymize and so that you
can't just decode and attach it you know
it as you know these can be broken okay
yeah they can be broken and have been
broken by other companies in the past
it's a new moral sphere that we don't
know how to how to deal with look in
principle do I have a problem with
private companies owning genetic
information know if it's secure if it's
anonymized if it's carefully curated no
the question is that this information
right now is still in a reader
readability phase we're still learning
how to read it for the most part you
know you get information about certain
disease risks you get very good
information about ancestry if you're
interested in ancestry that's a great
news if you're dying to know what your
ancestry is that's a great use in terms
of predicting future risk of disease
from your genome even the most advanced
genetic centers are struggling to do
this for reasons we told you already
number one is usually most human gene
diseases are not the product of one gene
but many genes and number two there's a
rich role of environment and chance
interacting or intersection with genes
that governs these kinds of decisions
ultimately so I think the chance that
from a privately owned company that you
will suddenly get information that's
valuable to your future health not your
ancestry still remains in its real
infancy come back in ten years and tell
us more ten years and you know it
depends on data right depends on data if
you if a million genomes
were collected and you could have the
capacity to now look to it's it's it's a
numbers problem you know more means more
the more you collect the more you learn
so there's a little bit of a
feed-forward quality to this so if a
million genomes were to be pooled I
think we would start getting more
information real information about risk
good so look I'm delighted so it's gonna
be signing books in the fight outside
afterwards my name is Daniel Glaser
please do look us up at Science Gallery
London and in the meantime join with me
in thanking our speaker Siddhartha
Mukherjee
[Applause]